README.md, before:

# Template

### Overview

Template is a mix of 3 goals:

- A showcase of some best practices and solutions to common problems. I can use it as a reminder of how I solved some problems, but it can be used as a support material during exchanges to other developers.
- A playground for me to test new patterns and libraries. The Android ecosystem evolves quickly so it's important to stay up-to-date with the industry trends.
- A template to start a new project faster. Set up and configuration is rarely the most interesting part of a project, and it can takes quite some times.

### To Do

As an always in-progress project, here's a short list of topics I want to explore or add:

- Improve the README
- Refactor the PokemonStore. Two improvements can be done: the in-memory cache is redundant with the database, and the pagination from the DB data is overkill and actually hurting the UX as even when all the data is available in DB, it still needs to be loaded per page
- Unit tests for the PokedexViewModel and the PokemonStore
- Integration tests for the Pokemon feature, trying MockWebServer in the process
- Convert all gradle files to Kotlin DSL
- Work on a CI, probably Bitrise or Github actions, that build and run tests of the project. It's also a nice opportunity to try to implement a visual QA
- Rename builds based on the build variant
- Use a custom font
- Add LeakCanary 2

## Template as a... template

### Good practices

- Single Activity
- Dark theme

#### Single Activity

I think that two most viable way to build an app is as a Single Activity or only Activities (no Fragments). An app that is half-way between these two philosophies has only downsides without any advantage: navigation is harder, having factorized behaviors in a BaseActivity or BaseFragment is also harder, for each new screen we should choose between making it with an Activity or a Fragment.

Creating an app using the Single Activity pattern is enjoyable and is the recommended way by Google, so it's the one I choose.

#### Dark theme

Even if the dark theme concept is relatively new users expect all apps to have one. Luckily inheriting from a *Theme.MaterialComponents.DayNight* theme is a great starting point and is doing a lot of work for us.

### Small optimizations

- Removing of unused alternatives resources: Adding a **resConfigs** property in the app *build.gradle* file removes resources from unused locales, reducing the final apk size. See the [Android developer documentation](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/shrink-code#unused-alt-resources) for more details.

### Libraries

Template uses some of the most widespread libraries: AAC ViewModel, LiveData, Retrofit, OkHttp, Room, Moshi, Glide, RxJava2, Firebase Crashlytics. As they are so commonly used a lot of documentation is available and there is a high chance that a new developer joining the project will be able to quickly add value.

### Gradle

An env product flavor is present on top of the default debug and release build types. Its primary use is to define the DOMAIN_URL variable for switching the back-end domain between prod, preprod and dev.

### Modules

#### Core module

The core module gathers base code and utility classes. It doesn't contain any business logic and basically it's code that can be copy-pasted in any project.

#### Data module

The data module only goal is to retrieve, gather and manipulate data that are hused by features. 

### Base classes

A BaseActivity and BaseFragment are implemented with the added benefit to automatically log the most interesting lifecycle events. Child activities and fragments just have to provide the logsTag variable.

### Setup

#### Crash reporting

Template uses Firebase Crashlytics library for crash reporting. It is disabled for dev builds through a flag in the dev AndroidManifest to avoid getting spammed by Firebase crash emails.

#### Logging

Logging is done using Timber. It is initialized to only print logs in debug builds, preventing logs in release versions.
TemplateExceptions, an Exception subclass, are logged in Crashlytics as non-fatal crashes so we still have crash insight.
Finally logs are forwarded to Crashlytics for non-dev builds in order to get more informations about crashes.

### Codestyle

The project code style is following the official [Kotlin coding convention](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coding-conventions.html) and is enforced by [klint](https://github.com/pinterest/ktlint). klint adds the ./gradlew klintcheck and ./gradlew klintformat Gradle tasks for finding and fixing formatting errors, see [Goobar.io](https://goobar.io/2019/07/25/adding-ktlint-to-your-kotlin-project/) tutorial for more informations.

## How to start a new project using Template

### Packages

The base package used by Template is mg.template, it can and should be replaced by your app package.

### Renaming

Basically everything called Template should be renamed with the real project name. It includes the TemplateApplication, TemplateException[TODO]

### Firebase

In order to use Firebase in Template, a google-services.json file should be put in the app/ folder and projects should be created for your.package, your.package.preprod and your.package.dev. If you are not planning to use Firebase simply remove the dependencies and their use in code.

Commit message:

Moved all versions to the Dependencies.kt file and finally deleted the old dependencies.gradle file.

README.md, after:

# Template

### Overview

Template is a mix of 3 goals:

- A showcase of some best practices and solutions to common problems. I can use it as a reminder of how I solved some problems, but it can be used as a support material during exchanges to other developers.
- A playground for me to test new patterns and libraries. The Android ecosystem evolves quickly so it's important to stay up-to-date with the industry trends.
- A template to start a new project faster. Set up and configuration is rarely the most interesting part of a project, and it can takes quite some times.

### To Do

As an always in-progress project, here's a short list of topics I want to explore or add:

- Improve the README
- Refactor the PokemonStore. Two improvements can be done: the in-memory cache is redundant with the database, and the pagination from the DB data is overkill and actually hurting the UX as even when all the data is available in DB, it still needs to be loaded per page
- Unit tests for the PokedexViewModel and the PokemonStore
- Integration tests for the Pokemon feature, trying MockWebServer in the process
- Convert all gradle files to Kotlin DSL -> On hold, after playing with the Kotlin DSL it doesn't feel like it's ready for production yet.
- Work on a CI, probably Bitrise or Github actions, that build and run tests of the project. It's also a nice opportunity to implement a visual QA
- Rename builds based on the build variant
- Use a custom font
- Add LeakCanary 2

## Template as a... template

### Good practices

- Single Activity
- Dark theme

#### Single Activity

I think that two most viable way to build an app is as a Single Activity or only Activities (no Fragments). An app that is half-way between these two philosophies has only downsides without any advantage: navigation is harder, having factorized behaviors in a BaseActivity or BaseFragment is also harder, for each new screen we should choose between making it with an Activity or a Fragment.

Creating an app using the Single Activity pattern is enjoyable and is the recommended way by Google, so it's the one I choose.

#### Dark theme

Even if the dark theme concept is relatively new users expect all apps to have one. Luckily inheriting from a *Theme.MaterialComponents.DayNight* theme is a great starting point and is doing a lot of work for us.

### Project set up

#### Gradle

Project and dependencies versions are factorized in a *Dependencies* file inside the *buildSrc* folder, as recommended in the [Gradle documentation](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/organizing_gradle_projects.html#sec:build_sources). It includes Android compile/min/target sdk versions, Java version and dependencies.
The main benefit of this approach is to centralize versions in a single place, avoiding having to edit every module *build.gradle* file each time a new version is available, and ensuring that all modules use the same versions.

### Small optimizations

- Removing of unused alternatives resources: Adding a **resConfigs** property in the app *build.gradle* file removes resources from unused locales, reducing the final apk size. See the [Android developer documentation](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/shrink-code#unused-alt-resources) for more details.

### Libraries

Template uses some of the most widespread libraries: AAC ViewModel, LiveData, Retrofit, OkHttp, Room, Moshi, Glide, RxJava2, Firebase Crashlytics. As they are so commonly used a lot of documentation is available and there is a high chance that a new developer joining the project will be able to quickly add value.

### Gradle

An env product flavor is present on top of the default debug and release build types. Its primary use is to define the DOMAIN_URL variable for switching the back-end domain between prod, preprod and dev.

### Modules

#### Core module

The core module gathers base code and utility classes. It doesn't contain any business logic and basically it's code that can be copy-pasted in any project.

#### Data module

The data module only goal is to retrieve, gather and manipulate data that are hused by features. 

### Base classes

A BaseActivity and BaseFragment are implemented with the added benefit to automatically log the most interesting lifecycle events. Child activities and fragments just have to provide the logsTag variable.

### Setup

#### Crash reporting

Template uses Firebase Crashlytics library for crash reporting. It is disabled for dev builds through a flag in the dev AndroidManifest to avoid getting spammed by Firebase crash emails.

#### Logging

Logging is done using Timber. It is initialized to only print logs in debug builds, preventing logs in release versions.
TemplateExceptions, an Exception subclass, are logged in Crashlytics as non-fatal crashes so we still have crash insight.
Finally logs are forwarded to Crashlytics for non-dev builds in order to get more informations about crashes.

### Codestyle

The project code style is following the official [Kotlin coding convention](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coding-conventions.html) and is enforced by [klint](https://github.com/pinterest/ktlint). klint adds the ./gradlew klintcheck and ./gradlew klintformat Gradle tasks for finding and fixing formatting errors, see [Goobar.io](https://goobar.io/2019/07/25/adding-ktlint-to-your-kotlin-project/) tutorial for more informations.

## How to start a new project using Template

### Packages

The base package used by Template is mg.template, it can and should be replaced by your app package.

### Renaming

Basically everything called Template should be renamed with the real project name. It includes the TemplateApplication, TemplateException[TODO]

### Firebase

In order to use Firebase in Template, a google-services.json file should be put in the app/ folder and projects should be created for your.package, your.package.preprod and your.package.dev. If you are not planning to use Firebase simply remove the dependencies and their use in code.
